# cipherwheel
`cipherwheel.py` is a software implementation of the Field Notes cipher wheel that ships with ["Clandestine" (Fall 2018)](https://fieldnotesbrand.com/products/clandestine). The notebooks are of excellent quality and subscribers get access to a physical cipher wheel. The literature accompanying the release included puzzles (see `messages.txt`) that require the wheel - or this code - to solve.  

# encoding & decoding 
The cipher wheel is a two-rotor wheel that places half of the alphabet on one rotor and half of the alphabet on the other rotor, alternating letters. While it is more complex than a straight one-direction shift (like ROT13) it is still a static alphabet that can be attacked with frequency analysis. One other consequence of this design is that pairs of adjacent keys can create identical outputs - so instead of 36 x 36 possible unique keys, there are 36 x 18. The two rotors in the default configuration generate a null offset with keys `XW` or `XV` -- that is, with either of those keys, "A" becomes "A", "B" becomes "B", and so on.  

I implement the Field Notes cipher wheel specifically, making use of [R. Ballestrini's code](https://russell.ballestrini.net/monoalphabetic-cipher-and-inverse-written-in-python/) for monoalphabetic shift ciphers but replacing the random alphabet with the Field Notes double-shifted version. The rotors are hard-coded but can be altered to support your own efforts. Altering the rotors will invalidate some of the unit tests - for example, you'll need to understand where your new rotor settings generate null ciphers. `testharness.py` was intended to iterate over all keys and identify conditions where the wheel was not working correctly; this can be turned into a feature if you have adjusted your rotors but do not know where your new null ciphers live on the dial.

# (in)security 

This is a monoalphabetic substitution cipher, which is a toy cipher. It *encodes*, rather than *encrypts*, your secrets.  It is **not adequate** for protecting secrets with real-world consequences. This is adequate for protecting television spoilers, riddles, and any other puzzle that can be solved by a high school student with fewer than ~4 hours of effort. If your threat model includes anyone who has read even a single book on codes and ciphers, they will have been exposed to the phrase "substitution cipher" and, using search engines, they will be able to trivially discover interactive solvers [like this one](https://www.simonsingh.net/The_Black_Chamber/substitutioncrackingtool.html).   

